---
slug: 2020-review
title: "2020 Year in Review"
date: 2020-12-31T14:30:20+01:00
lastmod: 2020-12-31T14:30:20+01:00
summary: >
keywords:
    -
categories:
    -
featuredImage:
images:
    -
series:
    -
draft: true
# Ref: https://github.com/luizdepra/hugo-coder/wiki/Configurations#front-matter
# Ref: https://gohugo.io/content-management/front-matter
---

I enjoy writing on this blog because writing and commiting my work allows my future self
to find out about my state of mind at the time of writing.

It's the end of the year, and, like many others, I want to commit my state of my mind going
into 2021.

Hopefully, this serves me in the future.

## January

- Onefootball/AWS: ML/AI Personalize Workshop; moving forward with a PoC built in Feb

## February

## March

- [How to use spaCy language models in Russian or Swedish]({{< ref "2020-03-22-spacy-stanza-russian-swedish.md" >}})

## April

## May

## June

- Rasa AI conference

- [Football Strava]({{< ref "2020-06-01-football-strava.md" >}})

## July

- Europython [notes]({{< ref "2020-07-27-europython2020.md" >}})

## August

## September

- [How to monitor your FastAPI service]({{< ref "2020-09-18-fastapi-monitoring.md">}})

- trax + Coursera

## October

- PyData Eindhoven, Met with ING and brainstormed about event detection in text.

## November

- EMNLP, Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Met with Rada Mihalcea (TextRank author), and with Vincent Warmerdam (Rasa + open source collaborator).
- Data natives, Met with Chris Wiggins, head of data science at New York Times, and Daniel Molnar, data engineering guru from Berlin.

## December

- Knowledge Connexions, Knowledge technology training. Met with Paco Nathan. Attended his kglab workshop, we talked about TextRank and how to apply knowledge graphs to OneFootball
- dbt coalesce, dbt analytics engineering conference. Attended talks about metadata analytics.

- [How to Parse dbt Artifacts]({{< ref "2020-12-20-dbt-artifacts.md" >}})

## Resources

1. [My link](url)

- work
- side projects
- books
- StackOverflow
- Github
- journal manual
- journal google doc
- research journal

- use pycalendarmap
